README.md, before:

# StatusLib

[![Build Status](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml)

This is a library designed to demonstrate an [Laminas API Tools](https://api-tools.getlaminas.org/) "Code-Connected"
REST API, and has been written in parallel with the [Laminas API Tools documentation](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-documentation).

It uses the following components:

- [rhumsaa/uuid](https://github.com/ramsey/uuid), a library for generating and validating UUIDs.
- [laminas-api-tools/api-tools-configuration](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-configuration), used for providing PHP
  files as one possible backend for reading/writing status messages.
- [laminas/laminas-config](https://getlaminas.org/) for the actual configuration writer used
  by the `api-tools-configuration` module.
- [laminas/laminas-db](https://getlaminas.org/), used for providing a database table as a
  backend for reading/writing status messages.
- [laminas/laminas-stdlib](https://getlaminas.org/), specifically the Hydrator subcomponent,
  for casting data from arrays to objects, and for the `ArrayUtils` class, which provides advanced
  array merging capabilities.
- [laminas/laminas-paginator](https://getlaminas.org/) for providing pagination.

It is written as a Laminas module, but could potentially be dropped into other
applications; use the `StatusLib\*Factory` classes to see how dependencies might be injected.

## Installation

Use [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) to install the library in your application:

```console
$ composer require laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example
```

If you are using this as part of a Laminas or Laminas API Tools application, you
may need to enable the module in your `config/application.config.php` file, if
you are not using the [laminas-component-installer](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-component-installer/):

```php
return [
    /* ... */
    'modules' => [
        /* ... */
        'StatusLib',
    ],
    /* ... */
];
```

## Configuration

When used as a Laminas module, you may define the following configuration values in order
to tell the library which adapter to use, and what options to pass to that adapter.

```php
[
    'statuslib' => [
        'db' => 'Name of service providing DB adapter',
        'table' => 'Name of database table within db to use',
        'array_mapper_path' => 'path to PHP file returning an array for use with ArrayMapper',
    ],
    'service_manager' => [
        'aliases' => [
            // Set to either StatusLib\ArrayMapper or StatusLib\TableGatewayMapper
            \StatusLib\Mapper::class => \StatusLib\ArrayMapper::class,
        ],
    ],
]
```

For purposes of the Laminas API Tools examples, we suggest the following:

- Create a PHP file in your application's `data/` directory named `statuslib.php` that returns an
  array:

  ```php
  <?php
  return [];
  ```

- Edit your application's `config/autoload/local.php` file to set the `array_mapper_path`
  configuration value to `data/statuslib.php`:

  ```php
  <?php
  return [
      /* ... */
      'statuslib' => [
        'array_mapper_path' => 'data/statuslib.php',
      ],
  ];
  ```

The above will provide the minimum necessary requirements for experimenting with the library in
order to test an API.

## Using a database

The file `data/statuslib.sqlite.sql` contains a [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/) schema. You can
create a SQLite database using:

```console
$ sqlite3 statuslib.db < path/to/data/statuslib.sqlite.sql
```

The schema can be either used directly by other databases, or easily modified to work with other
databases.


## StatusLib in a New Laminas  Project

1. Create a new Laminas project from scratch; we'll use `my-project` as our project folder:

  ```console
  $ composer create-project laminas/skeleton-application my-project
  ```

2. Install the StatusLib module:

  ```console
  $ composer require laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example
  ```

3. Build a DataSource

    - Option A: Array data source:

      First, copy the sample array to the `data` directory of thet application:

      ```console
      $ cp vendor/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/data/sample-data/array-data.php data/status.data.php
      ```

      Then, configure this datasource by setting up a `local.php` configuration file:

      ```console
      $ cp config/autoload/local.php.dist config/autoload/local.php
      ```

      Next, add the StatusLib specific configuration for an array based data source:

      ```php
      'statuslib' => [
         'array_mapper_path' => 'data/status.data.php',
      ],
      'service_manager' => [
          'aliases' => [
              \StatusLib\Mapper::class => \StatusLib\ArrayMapper::class,
          ],
      ],
      ```

    - Option B: Sqlite data source:

      First, create a sqlite3 database, and fill it with the sample data:

      ```console
      $ sqlite3 data/status.db < vendor/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/data/statuslib.sqlite.sql
      $ sqlite3 data/status.db < vendor/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/data/sample-data/db-sqlite-insert.sql
      ```
  
      Then, configure this datasource by setting up a `local.php` configuration file:

      ```console
      $ cp config/autoload/local.php.dist config/autoload/local.php
      ```

      Next, add the StatusLib specific configuration for a sqlite database based data source:

      ```php
      'db' => [
          'adapters' => [
              'MyDb' => [
                  'driver' => 'pdo_sqlite',
                  'database' => __DIR__ . '/../../data/status.db'
              ],
          ],
      ],
      'statuslib' => [
          'db' => 'MyDb',
          'table' => 'status',
      ],
      'service_manager' => [
          'aliases' => [
              \StatusLib\Mapper::class => \StatusLib\TableGatewayMapper::class,
          ],
      ],
      ```

4. Create a test script to prove the data source is working:

   ```php
   // test.php
   namespace StatusLib;

   use Laminas\Mvc\Application;
   use Laminas\Stdlib\ArrayUtils;

   include 'vendor/autoload.php';

   $appConfig = include 'config/application.config.php';

   if (file_exists('config/development.config.php')) {
       $appConfig = ArrayUtils::merge(
           $appConfig,
           include 'config/development.config.php'
       );
   }

   $app = Application::init($appConfig);
   $services = $app->getServiceManager();

   $statusMapper = $services->get(Mapper::class);
   foreach ($statusMapper->fetchAll() as $status) {
       printf(
           "[%d] [%s] %s (by %s)\n",
           $status->timestamp,
           $status->id,
           $status->message,
           $status->user
       );
   }
   ```

Commit message:

Message against the war, in Russian and English
🇷🇺 Русским гражданам

Мы, участники Laminas, родились и живем в разных странах. У многих из нас есть друзья, родственники и коллеги как в России, так и в Украине. Некоторые из нас родились в России. Некоторые из нас живут в России. У некоторых бабушки и дедушки сражались с фашистами во Второй мировой войне. Здесь никто не поддерживает фашизм.

У одного из нас есть украинская родственница, которая спаслась из дома вместе с сыном. Поезд задержался из-за бомбежки на дороге впереди. У нас есть друзья, которые прячутся в бомбоубежищах. Мы с тревогой ждем весточки от них после воздушных налетов, которые беспорядочно наносят удары и попадают по больницам, школам, детским садам и домам. Мы не берем это из каких-либо СМИ. Мы наблюдаем это напрямую.

Вы доверяете нам достаточно, чтоб использовать наши программы, и мы просим вас довериться нам вновь. Мы нуждаемся в помощи. Выходите и протестуйте против этой бесполезной войны. Остановите кровопролитие. Скажите "Нет войне!"

🇺🇸 To Citizens of Russia

We at Laminas come from all over the world. Many of us have friends, family and colleagues in both Russia and Ukraine. Some of us were born in Russia. Some of us currently live in Russia. Some have grandparents who fought Nazis in World War II. Nobody here supports fascism.

One team member has a Ukrainian relative who fled her home with her son. The train was delayed due to bombing on the road ahead. We have friends who are hiding in bomb shelters. We anxiously follow up on them after the air raids, which indiscriminately fire at hospitals, schools, kindergartens and houses. Were not taking this from any media. These are our actual experiences.

You trust us enough to use our software. We ask that you trust us to say the truth on this. We need your help. Go out and protest this unnecessary war. Stop the bloodshed. Say "stop the war!"

Signed-off-by: Michał Bundyra <contact@webimpress.com>

README.md, after:

# StatusLib

[![Build Status](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml)

> ## 🇷🇺 Русским гражданам
> 
> Мы, участники Laminas, родились и живем в разных странах. У многих из нас есть друзья, родственники и коллеги как в России, так и в Украине. Некоторые из нас родились в России. Некоторые из нас живут в России. У некоторых бабушки и дедушки сражались с фашистами во Второй мировой войне. Здесь никто не поддерживает фашизм.
> 
> У одного из нас есть украинская родственница, которая спаслась из дома вместе с сыном. Поезд задержался из-за бомбежки на дороге впереди. У нас есть друзья, которые прячутся в бомбоубежищах. Мы с тревогой ждем весточки от них после воздушных налетов, которые беспорядочно наносят удары и попадают по больницам, школам, детским садам и домам. Мы не берем это из каких-либо СМИ. Мы наблюдаем это напрямую.
> 
> Вы доверяете нам достаточно, чтоб использовать наши программы, и мы просим вас довериться нам вновь. Мы нуждаемся в помощи. Выходите и протестуйте против этой бесполезной войны. Остановите кровопролитие. Скажите "Нет войне!"
> 
> ## 🇺🇸 To Citizens of Russia
> 
> We at Laminas come from all over the world. Many of us have friends, family and colleagues in both Russia and Ukraine. Some of us were born in Russia. Some of us currently live in Russia. Some have grandparents who fought Nazis in World War II. Nobody here supports fascism.
> 
> One team member has a Ukrainian relative who fled her home with her son. The train was delayed due to bombing on the road ahead. We have friends who are hiding in bomb shelters. We anxiously follow up on them after the air raids, which indiscriminately fire at hospitals, schools, kindergartens and houses. We're not taking this from any media. These are our actual experiences.
> 
> You trust us enough to use our software. We ask that you trust us to say the truth on this. We need your help. Go out and protest this unnecessary war. Stop the bloodshed. Say "stop the war!"

This is a library designed to demonstrate an [Laminas API Tools](https://api-tools.getlaminas.org/) "Code-Connected"
REST API, and has been written in parallel with the [Laminas API Tools documentation](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-documentation).

It uses the following components:

- [rhumsaa/uuid](https://github.com/ramsey/uuid), a library for generating and validating UUIDs.
- [laminas-api-tools/api-tools-configuration](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-configuration), used for providing PHP
  files as one possible backend for reading/writing status messages.
- [laminas/laminas-config](https://getlaminas.org/) for the actual configuration writer used
  by the `api-tools-configuration` module.
- [laminas/laminas-db](https://getlaminas.org/), used for providing a database table as a
  backend for reading/writing status messages.
- [laminas/laminas-stdlib](https://getlaminas.org/), specifically the Hydrator subcomponent,
  for casting data from arrays to objects, and for the `ArrayUtils` class, which provides advanced
  array merging capabilities.
- [laminas/laminas-paginator](https://getlaminas.org/) for providing pagination.

It is written as a Laminas module, but could potentially be dropped into other
applications; use the `StatusLib\*Factory` classes to see how dependencies might be injected.

## Installation

Use [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) to install the library in your application:

```console
$ composer require laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example
```

If you are using this as part of a Laminas or Laminas API Tools application, you
may need to enable the module in your `config/application.config.php` file, if
you are not using the [laminas-component-installer](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-component-installer/):

```php
return [
    /* ... */
    'modules' => [
        /* ... */
        'StatusLib',
    ],
    /* ... */
];
```

## Configuration

When used as a Laminas module, you may define the following configuration values in order
to tell the library which adapter to use, and what options to pass to that adapter.

```php
[
    'statuslib' => [
        'db' => 'Name of service providing DB adapter',
        'table' => 'Name of database table within db to use',
        'array_mapper_path' => 'path to PHP file returning an array for use with ArrayMapper',
    ],
    'service_manager' => [
        'aliases' => [
            // Set to either StatusLib\ArrayMapper or StatusLib\TableGatewayMapper
            \StatusLib\Mapper::class => \StatusLib\ArrayMapper::class,
        ],
    ],
]
```

For purposes of the Laminas API Tools examples, we suggest the following:

- Create a PHP file in your application's `data/` directory named `statuslib.php` that returns an
  array:

  ```php
  <?php
  return [];
  ```

- Edit your application's `config/autoload/local.php` file to set the `array_mapper_path`
  configuration value to `data/statuslib.php`:

  ```php
  <?php
  return [
      /* ... */
      'statuslib' => [
        'array_mapper_path' => 'data/statuslib.php',
      ],
  ];
  ```

The above will provide the minimum necessary requirements for experimenting with the library in
order to test an API.

## Using a database

The file `data/statuslib.sqlite.sql` contains a [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/) schema. You can
create a SQLite database using:

```console
$ sqlite3 statuslib.db < path/to/data/statuslib.sqlite.sql
```

The schema can be either used directly by other databases, or easily modified to work with other
databases.


## StatusLib in a New Laminas  Project

1. Create a new Laminas project from scratch; we'll use `my-project` as our project folder:

  ```console
  $ composer create-project laminas/skeleton-application my-project
  ```

2. Install the StatusLib module:

  ```console
  $ composer require laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example
  ```

3. Build a DataSource

    - Option A: Array data source:

      First, copy the sample array to the `data` directory of thet application:

      ```console
      $ cp vendor/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/data/sample-data/array-data.php data/status.data.php
      ```

      Then, configure this datasource by setting up a `local.php` configuration file:

      ```console
      $ cp config/autoload/local.php.dist config/autoload/local.php
      ```

      Next, add the StatusLib specific configuration for an array based data source:

      ```php
      'statuslib' => [
         'array_mapper_path' => 'data/status.data.php',
      ],
      'service_manager' => [
          'aliases' => [
              \StatusLib\Mapper::class => \StatusLib\ArrayMapper::class,
          ],
      ],
      ```

    - Option B: Sqlite data source:

      First, create a sqlite3 database, and fill it with the sample data:

      ```console
      $ sqlite3 data/status.db < vendor/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/data/statuslib.sqlite.sql
      $ sqlite3 data/status.db < vendor/laminas-api-tools/statuslib-example/data/sample-data/db-sqlite-insert.sql
      ```
  
      Then, configure this datasource by setting up a `local.php` configuration file:

      ```console
      $ cp config/autoload/local.php.dist config/autoload/local.php
      ```

      Next, add the StatusLib specific configuration for a sqlite database based data source:

      ```php
      'db' => [
          'adapters' => [
              'MyDb' => [
                  'driver' => 'pdo_sqlite',
                  'database' => __DIR__ . '/../../data/status.db'
              ],
          ],
      ],
      'statuslib' => [
          'db' => 'MyDb',
          'table' => 'status',
      ],
      'service_manager' => [
          'aliases' => [
              \StatusLib\Mapper::class => \StatusLib\TableGatewayMapper::class,
          ],
      ],
      ```

4. Create a test script to prove the data source is working:

   ```php
   // test.php
   namespace StatusLib;

   use Laminas\Mvc\Application;
   use Laminas\Stdlib\ArrayUtils;

   include 'vendor/autoload.php';

   $appConfig = include 'config/application.config.php';

   if (file_exists('config/development.config.php')) {
       $appConfig = ArrayUtils::merge(
           $appConfig,
           include 'config/development.config.php'
       );
   }

   $app = Application::init($appConfig);
   $services = $app->getServiceManager();

   $statusMapper = $services->get(Mapper::class);
   foreach ($statusMapper->fetchAll() as $status) {
       printf(
           "[%d] [%s] %s (by %s)\n",
           $status->timestamp,
           $status->id,
           $status->message,
           $status->user
       );
   }
   ```
